Distance Map
============

![image]

Visualizes distances between items

Signals
-------

Inputs:

:   -   

        Distance Matrix (SymMatrix)

        :   A distance matrix

Outputs:

:   -   

        Examples (ExampleTable)

        :   Examples corresponding to selected elements of the matrix

    -   

        Attribute List (orange.VarList)

        :   Attributes corresponding to selected elements of the matrix

Description
-----------

Distance Map is a visualization of distances between objects. The
visualization is rather simple: it is the same as is we printed out a
table of numbers, except that the numbers are replaced by spots colored
by colors from the specified palette.

The distances are most often distances between examples (for instance
from Example Distance or attributes (for instance from
Attribute Distance. The widget does not require that (another option can
be loading the distances from a file using Distance File, although when
one of these is the case, the user can select a region of the map and
the widget will output the corresponding examples or attributes through
the appropriate signal.

![image][1]

The snapshot shows distances between attributes in the heart disease
data, using the preset Black - Red palette, where smaller numbers are
represented with black and larger with red. The matrix is symmetric and
the diagonal is black - no attribute is different from itself. The
former (symmetricity) is always assumed, while the diagonal may also be
non-zero.

![image][2]

The widgetâ€™s settings are divided into three tabs. The first one defines
the size and order of cells. Width and Height in the Cell Size box set
the size of the cells. The cells can be restricted to squares
(Cells as squares) and drawn with or without gridlines in between
(Show grid). When cells are too small (8 pixels or less), the grid
disappears in any case.

Merge merges multiple cells into a single cell, which can be useful when
the matrix is too large. For this option to yield meaningful results,
items need to be sorted so similar items are merged. The widget has
three options; it can leave the items as they are (No sorting) it can
put similar items together (Adjacent distance) or randomly shuffle the
items (Random order). Of these, adjacent distance is unfortunately not
implemented yet.

![image][3]

The second tab defines the colors that represent the numeric values.
Gamma defines how numbers are mapped onto the palette colors. When set
to 1 (default), the mapping is linear. When it decreases, the numeric
values at the lower end get similar colors, the curve get steeper in the
middle, and higher values are again represented with colors which are
more similar than if gamma was higher. The graph below shows the mapping
function at gamma=0.25.

  [image]: ../../../../Orange/OrangeWidgets/Unsupervised/icons/DistanceMatrix.svg
  [1]: images/DistanceMap.png
  [2]: images/DistanceMap-Settings.png
  [3]: images/DistanceMap-Colors.png

.. image:: images/DistanceMap-gamma.png

Setting gamma is useful when the distribution of distances has long
tails which are not very interested. The widget also offers controls for
cutting of the outliers. Normally, the color palette is used to
visualize the entire range of distances appearing in the matrix. This
can be changed be checking Enable thresholds and setting the low and
high threshold. Distances outside this interval are then shown using
special colors, so the color spectrum can be used for visualizing the
interesting part of the distribution.

The widget supports different color schemes. The built-in schemes are
named Blue - Yellow, Black - Red and Green - Black - Red. The schema is
defined, first, by the two colors representing the lowest and highest
distances. The two colors are set by clicking the rectangles to the left
and right of the color strip below the schema name. The transition can
go either from one color to another (in the RGB space) or
Pass through black, that is, from one color to black and then to
another. Colors can also be set for undefined values (N/A), values below
and above the low and high thresholds (Underflow and Overflow), the
background (Background), the outline of the cell under the mouse cursor
(Cell outline) and the marker around the selected region
(Selected cells).

User can modify the existing schemata and also create new, customized
schemata (New). The built-in schemata are shown below.

![image]

![image][1]

The last tab defines the shown information and controls selection of
cells. Show legend determines whether the widget shows the colored strip
at the top which shows the mapping of numbers into colors. Show labels
shows and hides the item names (e.g. age, gender etc) besides the map.
Labels can only be shown it they exist; they do when the data represents
distances between attributes or when the data is loaded from a labeled
distance file.

If Show balloon is checked, a ballon appears when the mouse is hovering
over a cell, which shows the numerical distances and, if
Display item names is checked, also the names of the corresponding
items.

The user can select a region in the map by the usual click-and-drag with
the mouse. When a part of the map is selected, the widget output all
items corresponding to the selected cells. The three buttons in the
Select can undo the last selection, remove all selections and send the
selected data. If Send after mouse release is checked, the data is set
automatically, without needing to press the button above.

Examples
========

The above snapshots were obtained by the following schema:

![image][2]

The file widget loads the iris data set; we then compute the attribute
distances and visualize them.

  [image]: images/DistanceMap-Green-Black-Red.png
  [1]: images/DistanceMap-Info.png
  [2]: images/DistanceMap-Schema.png